---
layout: post
title: Going (article)
date: 1998-02-03
categories: ["Recent Forgeries"]
characters: 
tags: ["English", "article"]
origin: ["Recent Forgeries"]
pov: 
description: 
published: true
---

He remembers driving through these farm valleys and government lands years ago, in a succession of well-maintained old cars and trucks. Back then he was always at the wheel and usually alone, constantly checking for slightest change in details of familiar roadside scenery, testing his memory from milepost to milepost. He had a need to know the terrain, to remind himself of the sequence of rivers, bridges, mountain passes, good places to eat and sleep. He's not allowed to drive anymore, but doesn't mind. He's more concerned with the two neatly typed lists that are taped to the bathroom door of his private bus than he is with what's out the window. One list is of the various meals, pills, drops, shots, and exercises he must take to keep his body and mind functioning with reduced fear of sudden collapse. The other one is of hospitals, doctors' home phone numbers, special drugstores - complete with addresses, exact directions, freeway exit numbers for each community. Underneath that is nicely handwritten "You're as young as you feel." He hasn't been able to persuade any of his nurses to cross it out. Lately, he's been reading a fair amount, concentrating on comic-book compilations. Today he's familiarising himself with recent variations in the X-MEN series. He's considering trying his hand at some ideas he's developed concerning Wolverine and his outfits; might send some sketches in to Marvel. Every now and then he has a little crisis, and we call ahead to prepare the nearest emergency ward for his imminent arrival. We are very organised, and there are at least two of us awake at all times. Everything has worked out smoothly so far.
