---
layout: post
title: Relay (article)
date: 1998-01-25
categories: ["Recent Forgeries"]
characters: 
tags: ["English", "article"]
origin: ["Recent Forgeries"]
pov: 
description: 
published: true
---

He crouches in the lee of a plexiglas bus shelter to light his first cigarette of the day. This accomplished, he straightens and strides away, quickly accelerating into his usual high-speed lope. Motion is sanctuary. He is accustomed to keeping this race-walk pace for hours at a time, back and forth on the same stretch of Sunset Boulevard between Western and Vine. "Don't Walk" signals annoy him, and he invariably disregards them, finding reckless gaps in the honking, grinding traffic. No intersection is forbidden to him. Incredibly, he's only been ticketed and fined once in nine years, and has never suffered more than a brush from a passing bumper. He often runs over car hoods without breaking stride, and uses buses nudging their way back into the noon stream as shields. He is thinking of buying himself one of those long, flat black wallets with a chain on it when a brand-new Harley owner on her way to the health club runs the light on Gower and pitches him through the glass at Denny's. In less time than is takes the police to arrive, he bleeds to death on the salad bar. The one woman in the ladies' room at the time, an unemployed actress from Missouri, comes out to see what all the noise is about. She realises that, in all the commotion, she can easily walk out on her check. This is not unusual for her; tragedy has often been her ally.
