---
layout: post
title: Linger (article)
date: 2005-01-01
categories: ["Linger"]
characters: 
tags: ["English", "article"]
origin: ["Linger"]
pov: 
description: 
published: true
---

Light comes slowly, too slowly, as I stumble into your sights. I'm yours, you're mine. Have you lost your picture of the road through the trees? Misplaced the list of rivers and place-names you borrowed to tell stories? Do you care if you miss the ending, if the hero's welcome is a send-off? Will you go from your bed, leaving us as quietly as the moon does? We begin to recognise each other, but appearances change and deceive us, as fog hides a reef. I'll leave out most of our sins as we glimpse the day you're allowed to back away untouched. Just reread the statement you hope speaks for your body. I miss you, as I have for years,and retain a measure of respect for your temper, which someday may be all you have left of your independence.

You've seemed nearly one with beasts you've slaughtered, and always fond of friends and strangers you've randomly, unexpectedly, had no patience for. You've taught us the value of physical work, and a general sense of fairness. Ethics and justice in the greater world are complicated subjects, however. When we ourselves become the bully, do we know it? Will I let bygones be bygones? Will you go to sleep angry? When we walk away in our separate directions, will it matter who had the last word, who was in charge in the end? Will it matter why we wrote each other irregularly, fulfilling a contract started as soon as I could push ink in a straight line? I've sometimes wanted to leave you behind, but still use old words of yours in new sentences, saying things we wrote each other and never spoke.

You have a farmer's acceptance of demise and decay, an ingrown certainty of Spring. You'll take with you a private understanding of soil and unseen skies, of mating habits and coastal wind patterns, but will leave us plenty to go through and call our own, sparrows on spilt grain. You'll rise early, as always, and drift high above the horizon, first to see unclaimed fields, geese returning from the south, a buck in shadow at meadow's edge, and the sudden and shocking outline of continents unknown to any of us. You've always shared the excitement of your discoveries, insisted that we pay attention to your finds, and learn to live in your landscapes.

You'll carry one small piece of our bone to ick for eternity, your secret commendation, clasped against your hip as blood slows, cools, and blackens. We won't take it from you, won't peer into your fist to guess what it might be. Take that consolation, that promise you deserve. Your appetite has kept you alive through bilious, hoarfrost witching hours, determined to see you reach another set of high hay days. You lower your head against the night, tilting your eyes away from the faint arctic glow, red cheek burning against the back-door window. You have winter all to yourself and could easily be the only man awake between here and Canada right now. Alone to witness coy-dogs disappear behind the barn, seeking or just done with some savagery. Something's been killed recently. You can feel it inside, even as you cup your hands to your tired eyes and strain against the freezing glass, trying to see through the ghosts of willows. It's much too quiet, even for this cold hour.
