---
layout: post
title: Quotes in "Miyelo"
date: 2003-01-06
categories: ["Miyelo"]
characters: ["Joseph Campbell"]
tags: ["English", "sentences", "quotes"]
origin: ["Miyelo"]
pov: 
description: 
published: true
---

When I went to the dance, I went only to see and to learn what the people believed; but now I was going to stay and use the power that had been given me. The dance was over for that day, but they would dance again next day, and I would dance with them.

——Black Elk, Oglala Lakota

<br>

In sacred space everything is done so that the environment becomes a metaphor.

——Joseph Campbell

<br>

Grandfather says, when your friends die you must not cry. You must not hurt anybody or do harm to anyone. You must not fight. Do right always. It will give you satisfaction in life...

I want you to dance every six weeks. Make a feast at the dance and have food that everyone may eat. Then bathe in the water. That is all. You will receive good words again from me sometime. Do not tell lies.

——Wovoka, Paiute

<br>

When the buffalo went away the hearts of my people fell to the ground, and they could not lift them up again. After this nothing happened. There was little singing anywhere.

——Chief Plenty Coups, Crow

<br>

We do not want your sivilization. We would live as our fathers did, and their fathers before them.

——Crazy Horse, Oglala Lakota

<br>

I did not know then how much had ended. As I look back now from the high hill of my old age... I can see that something else died there in the bloody mud and was covered up by the blizzard. A people's dream died there. It was a beautiful dream...

——Black Elk, Oglala Lakota

<br>

All things are in process, rising and returning. Plants come to blossom, but only to return to the root. Returning to the root is like seeking tranquility. Seeking tranquility is like moving toward destiny. To move toward destiny is like eternity. To know eternity is enlightenment, and not to recognize eternity brings disorder and evil.

——Lao-Tse

<br>

Fully three miles from the scene of the massacre we found the body of a woman completely covered with a blanket of snow, and from this point on we found them scattered along as they had been relentlessly hunted down and slaughtered while fleeing for their lives. Some of our people discovered relatives or friends among the dead, and there was much wailing and mourning. When we reached the spot where the Indian camp had stood, among the fragments of burned tents and other belongings we saw the frozen bodies lying close together or piled one upon another...

It took all of my nerve to keep my composure in the face of this spectacle, and of the excitement and grief of my Indian companions, nearly every one of whom was crying aloud or singing his death song. The white men became very nervous, but I set them to examining and uncovering every body to see if one were living. Although they had been lying untended for two days and nights, a number had survived. Among them I found a baby of about a year old warmed wrapped and entirely unhurt. I brough her in, and she was afterward adopted and educated by an army officer. One man who was severely wounded begged me to fill his pipe. We brought him into the chapel. He was welcomed by his wife and daughters with cries of joy, but he died a day or two later.

Under a wagon I discovered an old woman, totally blind and entirely helpless. A few had managed to crawl away to some place of shelter, and we found in a log store nearby several who were badly hurt and others who had died after reaching there. After we had dispatched several wagonloads to the agency, we observed groups of warriorrs watching us from adjacent buttes; probably friends of the victims who had come there for the same purpose of ourselves. A majority of our party, fearing an attack, insisted that someone ride back to the agency for an escortof soldiers, and as mine was the best horse, it fell to me to go. I covered the eighteen miles in quick time and was not interfered with in any way, although if the Indians had meant mischief they could easily have picked my off from any of the ravines and gulches.

All this was a severe ordeal for one who had so lately put all his faith in the Christian love and lofty ideals of the white man. Yet I passed no hasty judgement, and was thankful that I might be of some service and relieve even a small part of the suffering.

——Ohiyesa (Charles Alexander Easrman, M.D.), Yankton Nakota

<br>

Discovery gave an exclusive right to extinguish the Indian right of occupancy, either by purchase or by conquest.

——Chief Justice John Marshall

<br>

The savage reibes of our Western frontier ought to be regarded as our natural enemies.

——Alexander Hamilton

<br>

It was thanks to their military superiority, rather than to any social, moral, or natural advantage, that the white peoples of the world managed to create and control... the first global hegemony in history.

——K. N. Parker

<br>

The most ultimately righteous of all wars is a war with savages.

——President George Herbert Walker Bush

<br>

The attempted transformation of the Indian by thewhite man and the chaos that has resulted are but the fruits of the white man's disobedience of a fundamental and spiritual law.

"Civilization" has been thrust upon me since the days of the reservations, and it has not added one whit to my sense of justice, to my reverence for the rights of life, to my love for truth, honesty, and generosity, or to my faith in Wakan Tanka, God of the Lakotas.

For, after all the great religions have been preached and expounded, or have been revealed by brilliant scholars, or have been written in fine books and embellished in fine language with finer covers, man - all man - is still confronted with the Great Mystery.

——Chief Luther Standing Bear, Oglala Lakota

<br>

For what it is to die but to stand naked in the wind and to melt into the sun? And what is it to cease breathing, but to free the breath from its restless tides, that it may rise and expand and seek God unencumbered?

Only when you drink from the river of silence shall you indeed sing.

And when you have reached the mountain top, then you shall begin to climb.

And when the earth shall claim your limbs, then shall you truly dance.

——Kahlil Gibran

<br>

Here one can neither stand nor lie nor sit

There is not even silence in the mountains

But dry sterile thunder without rain

There is not even solitude in the mountains

But red sullen faces sneer and snarl

From doors of mudcracked houses

——T. S. Eliot

<br>

None but the dead are permitted to speak truth.

——Mark Twain

<br>

The public is not unaware of what is happening, though with the success of the policies of isolation and breakdown of organizational structure, the response if erratic and self-destructive: faith in ridiculous billionaire saviors, myths of past innocence and noble leaders, religious and jingoistic fanaticism, conspiracy cults, unfocused skepticism and disillusionament - a mixture that has not had happy consequences in the past.

——Noam Chomsky

<br>

Indian history reveals that the United States and its predecessor British colonies have wrought great harm in the world. We must not forget this - not to wallow in our wrongdoing, but to understand and to learn, that we might not wreak harm again. We must temper our national pride with critical self-knowledge.

——James W. Loewen

<br>

When I reduce civilization to its lowest terms, it becomes a system of life based upon trade. The dollar is the measure of value, and might still spells right; otherwise, why war?

Yet even in deep jungles God's own sunlight penetrates, and I stand before my own people still as an advocate of civilization. Why? First, because there is no chance for our former simple way of life anymore; and second, because I realize that the white man's religion is not responsible for his mistakes. There is every evidence that God has given him all the light necessary by which to live in peace and good-will with his brother; and we also know that many brilliant civilizations have collapsed in physical and moral decadence. It is for us to avoid that fate if we can.

I am an Indian; and while II have learned much from civilization, for which I am grateful, I have never lost my Indian sense of right and justice. I am for development and progress along social and spiritual lines, rather than those of commerce, nationalism, or material efficiency. Nevertheless, so long as I live, I am an American.

——Ohiyesa (Charles Alexander Eastman, M.D.), Yankton Nakota

<br>

For what is it to die but to stand naked in the wind and to melt into the sun?

And what is it to cease breathing, but to free the breath from its restless tides.

that is may rise and expand and seek God unexcumbered?

<br>

Only when you drink from the river of silence shall you indeed sing.

And when you have reached the mountain top, then you shall begin to climb.

And when the earth shall claim your limbs, then shall you truly dance.

——Kahlil Gibran
