---
layout: post
title: Moravia (article)
date: 2008-01-04
categories: ["Skovbo"]
characters: 
tags: ["English", "article"]
origin: ["Skovbo"]
pov: 
description: 
published: true
---

I would undeceive myself here by blooming lilac and cheery in the hills over Oloumoc, draw no conclusion, make no plan, be in the air. Coarse gypsy fiddling, strained and trebly, reaches me from the open window of my rented red Opel, insisting through the roadside birches, breaking my blank rest-stop state as the wind drops to a flagging breeze. Could have shut down the engine for quiet and fuel's sake before wandering into the mustard seed. I do not move, determined to imagine no car, no road, as I stare at the lowering sky to the north - imagine hearing no music but the brittle rustle of last autumn's remaining dead leaves, tipped and lifted by half-hearted evening gusts ruffling this ridge, and the drone of first ravenous flies hovering over you, crow, lying in new weeds at my feet. Hours ago I stopped the car outside Holice to walk cross the finely tilled grey earth of a farmer's field and look at a dead fawn I'd spotted from the road. There I made two photographs to accompany the images of various roadkill and other deceased animals I've collected over the past seven or eight years, not wanting to forget how thoroughly lonesome that young roe deer's finish seemed. Here, on this flowering slope, moments after reaching higher ground to better witness carmine-lipped clouds begin to pale and shy away, I was surprised to find you, and nearly stepped on your dislocated wing. Your feathers still shine like running ink, and your eyes see through me in the fading rose light. Unlike the fawn, which lay belly-up, empty-eyed, stiff-legged, and bloated, with maggots furiously tumbling in its open mouth, you appear to be merely asleep, having fallen no more than half an hour before I arrived. Your breast, though no longer warm, is soft to the touch. The muscles in your legs, neck, and shoulders have not yet stiffened. We've had each other's eyes for several minutes now, perhaps in mutual recognition of some shared malignity, curious natures trailing mean streaks and a constant distaste for dying with so much left to be meddled with in this life. I've admired your kind in flight, in trees, on phone poles, streetlights, in fields, forests, out my kitchen window, all seasons in countless places around the world, and will not take it as bad luck to have stumbled upon you here at nightfall. We share this fertile promontory, and I consider burying you with care and respect even though I know worms will as easily reach and devour you on or in the earth. Perhaps I ought to burn you, but am so taken with your stillness, your ebony perfection and the utter lack of remorse or fear in your hard final gaze that I instead go turn off the ignition and the gypsies before turning to sit next to you. As  the light dims, I gradually lose all but the faint glimmer of your eyes. The wind picks up again, and it no longer seems unseasonably warm. A tanker truck, glinting silver, storms past on the road below us, headed southeast, and I decide I'd best be on my way if am to make Krakow by morning.
