---
layout: post
title: Gray (article)
date: 2008-01-01
categories: ["Skovbo"]
characters: 
tags: ["English", "article"]
origin: ["Skovbo"]
pov: 
description: 
published: true
---

Every morning you look past those gentle shoulders upstream, ignoring fertile ridges, determined to judge the breaking day on its own merits. Pleasure need not continue, is not guaranteed. Nor are sorrow or pain, being temporary as joy and war, no matter how much anyone may desire them. Peaks and steeples, pine tops and minarets could fill valleys, point paths through the sky, and all nameless birds and beasts might sleep in your bed for all your native optimism knows. Help is across the river, you hear, sounding from a bleached shell, dry and clean, treasured relic from your pre-war Polynesian idylls, echoing deracinated, universal, fatherless hymns that warn against spending last resources on myth's glow. Songs to take heart from, a certain pride in ignoring the shadow life and ending with aught but soiled shroud laid long and turned away from your godless hairy neck. You may fancy a smooth-faced girl, another sugar-bearing stranger on the night shift who does not seem to mind or even notice your emaciation and guttering candles. She may one day be the last face you see, poised and seeming to beckon you off your aching back and into her all-forgiving, sweetly approving embrace. You see your beloved blonde companion in all these women that touch you, feed you, clean you, suffer your aimless, not quite feeble wrath. Words come, carrying those unhurried, scrabbly sounds of toil that were always accompanied by the subtle, tangy reek of early Spring moss, mulch and gardener's sweat. You distinctly catch the echo of crow alarms high in the maple tops, your trowel scraping the limestone gravel soil. Confidential murmurs escape you, survivor of a generation worn and torn from admirably longing for the ability to get to places on its own. Instinctual, foreshortened connections are aroused in you now, repeatedly short-circuiting, which haltingly echo a residual sense of youthful belief in renewal and perseverance in spite of the no longer certain origins of your often unrequited, sketchy convictions. You can no longer fend for yourself, cannot identify the finches that pause at your window, nor put any semblance of order to your most treasured anecdotes. You'll keep trying to remember the beginnings of thoughts as your marrow dries and bones become glass. We remember your eyes today when the sun comes out for the first time, just before leaving our sky.
