---
layout: post
title: Leaves (article)
date: 2006-01-01
categories: ["I Forget You For Ever"]
characters: ["Henry Mortensen"]
tags: ["article", "English"]
origin: ["I Forget You For Ever"]
pov: 
description: 
published: true
---

Had a difference of opinion about a place on a river with the man sitting next to me on the plane to Portland. We could not agree that we were in fact momentarily glimpsing Biggs Junction through the thin cloud cover. Biggs is a town on the Columbia, a river I have crossed in order to enter and leave the state of Washington many times since the mid-1980s, and along the south shore of which I have driven in all kinds of weather. Although I am fairly familiar with the town, having passed through it, slept there, eaten there, purchased fuel, etc. on various occasions, I did not initially believe we were looking down at it from however many thousand feet. He turned out to be right, and I apologised for my error in thinking we were closer to the Dalles, a much bigger municipality that bears no resemblance to Biggs Junction other than the fact that it is on the same river and also in the state of Oregon.

I have a photo of you at age three, wearing light-brown cowboy boots, a tan fringe-sleeved jacket, and a red cowboy hat with a black yarn stampede string in the parking lot of what then was the main truck stop of that same town. You are running around on a windy winter's day, rosy-cheeked and laughing, being towed across the asphalt by your exuberant new puppy, Brigit. Red leash, I think she had then, or green. My recollection is that your hat blew off right after the picture was taken. We were headed south with your mother, who may have taken the picture, and a full load of clothing and household goods, taking Brigit to Los Angeles for the first time. We used to sometimes pick up chunks of basalt from around there to use in landscaping our garden, especially the ones that were red-hued from oxidation. I wonder if that is illegal, if the state of Oregon or federal authorities might object to those borrowings. Not being anywhere near the Columbia River at this moment, I am going by tangible representations, like the snapshot of you and Brigit which I can't find right now, but mostly am guided by abstracted images that continue to evolve in memory. I suppose I could say I am dominated by images, attached to ideas of walls, fallen trees, bee stings, spring run off, dead deer, dusk-stained clouds, of everybody and everything. I am what I imagine, not what I am. This constant envisioning is a helpful tool for artistic endeavours, and an unavoidable, overriding consequence of being a sentient human being. It can also be a barrier to understanding what is going, going, gone - what keeps me from being the person you are with when we are alone together.

More often than not, when you asked me to play "Fight" and "Dinosaurs" with your plastic people, prehistoric creatures, farm animals, sticks, strings, stones, blocks, ribbons, and rags, I answered with "Wait a minute; just let me finish writing this down... I'm washing the dishes right now... As soon as I finish this phone call (see? I'm on the phone?)... Let me just lie down for a minute; I'm tired... Can we do it a little later?... We just played that, didn't we?... I'll read you a story in a while instead..." or any number of fairly reasonable excuses for not stopping whatever I was busy with in order to get down on the floor and join your ephemeral, perfect worlds. Your mother nearly always understood the privilege of your persistent entreaties, and wisely accepted most of them in those first years. Every time I did say yes, allowing you to take the lead in eliminating everything outside of our intricately imagined landscapes, I found myself immediately grateful to be included, awed at your intelligence and commitment. I can easily recall your eyes and hands, the sound of your young voice, your delighted energy at sharing the game. Although I suppose I must have known that your single-minded enthusiasm for those make-believe sessions would probably dissipate and evolve into other preoccupations, it seemed that there would always be time later, in the morning, in some tomorrow. What I did not understand was how final that change would be. There would be no turning back, no making up for lost time, no use in pleading "Let's do it now; I have time and want to play 'Dinosaurs' with you.. You can kill the commander but my other guys are still alive, OK?... I'll be Godzilla and you can be Mothra...," or "Let's make a caveman village and have an earthquake." When you made the transition to "Let's wrestle!", "Come see my Viking warrior outfit!", or "Let's make an ambush!", I still occasionally found reasons to turn down your invitations. Too often, you continued to create history on your own while I used up time in other rooms. Now I wish I'd always joined in. Nothing could possibly have been as important as what you had in mind. Over the years we have done many things, been many places, and learned a bit about life in this world together, but there's a lot that I did not make time to do. Today you left home as a young man, moving over a threshold and across the country to begin a new life. We will continue to see each other, and I'll continue to have interests that distract me from your naturally less-frequent requests for sharing time. Hopefully, though, I'll remember that our play days are limited, and to say "yes" for as long as we have us.

