---
layout: post
title: For Ever (article)
date: 2006-01-07
categories: ["I Forget You For Ever"]
characters: 
tags: ["article", "English"]
origin: ["I Forget You For Ever"]
pov: 
description: 
published: true
---

The noise of people fighting in the other room: someone called the stone in the ground "Father". Mother, who had put it in the ground, took exception and wants to go outside and fig up the long piece of granite. I don't close my eyes or cover my ears when I could.

Bring your light, lay me down and cover me. I need to find a boat and stop getting drunk on planes. I want to see the sea and be only one with you in mind, to underline, startle true, pry my chest open. To hear and tell stories inglorious; no mythological kill shots, no targets, just observe native growth. Tell me about something you call the last decent war. Studies show passion ends. Forever has to start somewhere, so why not here? Remember to keep learning to suspect, weigh words that confirm answers before explaining questions. There are voices that can sit you up and appeal like no moon, that sound graceful and may inspire or sway allegiances regardless of the song's meaning or purpose. There are those who know and abuse this quirk of nature, this poison flower, who take advantage of the confusion they sow and further dim with ever simpler verbal transitions, ever baser characterisations. The weather is termed a lie without benefit of proof. Surrender in guises of impossible comforts and longevities are sold more attractively every day to ensure unconditional loyalty from a populace expertly terrified by allegedly timeless and universally aggressive tempos.

The world can wait. We can destroy ourselves and most all life forms, but the world, other than convulsing and absorbing our corpses, can do little but wait. This crumble, this ragged little rock far from most places, will turn however hard we squeeze it, hold it dear, or align our suffering lives with others, and is not necessarily ours to save or ruin. Knowingly doing some good or not is for us to choose. After now you may be reading this, may have read this, may have forgot all or some of this. After now, after this, after us, after all the world will wait. Are you losing your hair? Of course you are. Are you afraid? Ever? Of course you are. Lonely? Lacking? Uncertain? Yes. Drunk with power? Maybe. Should you qualify for full free health coverage and benefits regardless of pre-existing conditions? Probably, Would that be fair? Certainly. Should you be sent away to your room, to school, to the mountains, to nuns and priests, but mostly to yourself? Who knows? Should we have bombed or otherwise attacked anyone? Not in my opinion. Should we ever? I really don't think so. Ask most any young person if life has passed them by and you may get a puzzled look. Ask me and I will stop and think it over. Feelings on that question can change from moment to moment. Adventures most memorable have been those involving being or feeling lost and eventually regaining what I have understood to be my bearings. So far so good, so far for ever. Gradually, starting about two weeks ago, I have become increasingly sure that I am on borrowed time. Bonus time, extra time. Unexpected, unplanned-for time, some sort of grace period. Surely we could learn to look at our entire life spans that way, as flukey awards, but believing it without hesitation is neither a given nor apparently meant to be a constant.
